# Introduction

## Features

- Designed to be simple and minimalist.

- Syntax is similar to c/c++ influenced by:
	* [JavaScript](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JavaScript)
	* [D programming language](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/D_(programming_language))
	* [C# programming language](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C_Sharp_(programming_language))
	* [Lua programming language](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lua_(programming_language))


- Types are themselves variables of type `typename`.
	- Can be parameters of functions `int sizeof(typename type) { return type.size; }`.
	- Reflection is part of the language (some internal compiler functions needs to be exposed).
	- `variant` is a builtin dynamic type, a pair of type and data: (typename type, pointer data).


- Arrays are more than just pointers.
	- Fixed-size arrays: `int fixed[30];` (size is known by the compiler)
	- Dynamic-size arrays: `int dynamic[] = fixed;` (size is known at run-time)
	- Unknown-size arrays: `int memcmp(byte a[*], byte b[*], int size);` (used mostly for native calls)
	- Associative arrays: `double constants[string] = {"pi": 3.1415, ...};` (map)


- Enumeration values are named constants of a given type (number, object, function, ...).


- Expressions and types can be aliased with the `inline` keyword.
	- aliasing a typename: `inline double = float64;`
	- aliasing an expression: `inline min(int a, int b) = a < b ? a : b;`


- Conditional compile-time code generation and declarations with `static if` statement.
	- On 32 bit platform ...: `static if (int == int32) { ... }`


- `new` and `this` are not part of the language.
	- Create and initialize objects like in JavaScript `complex a = {re: 42, im: 2};`
	- Simply use [Uniform Function Call Syntax](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_Function_Call_Syntax) to write extension functions.


# Lexical structure

## Comments
- line comments: `// ...`
- block comments: `/* ... */`
- nested comments: `/+ ... +/`

## Identifiers
Identifiers are used for variable and type names.

Identifiers may contain letters, digits and underscores: `[_a-zA-Z][_a-zA-Z0-9]*`

## Keywords
Keywords are reserved words, which can not be used as identifiers.

- break
- const
- continue
- else
- emit
- enum
- for
- if
- inline
- parallel
- return
- static
- struct

## Operators
[TODO]

- !, ~, -, +, &
- (), [], .
- +, -, *, /, %
- &, |, ^, <<, >>
- ==, !=
- <, <=, >, >=
- ||, &&, ?:
- =, +=, -=, *=, /=, %=, &=, |=, ^=, <<=, >>=, >>>=
- ,

## Integer and floating-point literals

- binary literals: `'0'\[bB\]\[01\]+`
- octal literals: `'0'\[oO\]?\[0-7\]+`
- hexadecimal literals: `'0'\[xX\]\[0-9a-fA-F\]+`
- decimal literals: `0 | \[1-9\]\[0-9\]*`
- floating point literals: `(0 | \[1-9\]\[0-9\]*)? ('.'\[0-9\]*)? (\[eE\](\[+-\]?)\[0-9\]+)?`

### Decimal suffixes
At the end of a decimal literal, the following suffixes are parsed:

- `d`: results a int32 constant, ex: `inline i32Value = 3d;`
- `D`: results a int64 constant, ex: `inline i64Three = 3D;`
- `u`: results a uint32 constant, ex: `inline u32Three = 3u;`
- `U`: results a uint64 constant, ex: `inline u64Three = 3U;`
- `f`: results a float32 constant, ex: `inline f32Pi = 3.14f;`
- `F`: results a float64 constant, ex: `inline f64Three = 3F;`

## Character and string literals

- character literals: `'\[^'\n]*'`
- string literals: `"[^"\n]*" | "\\n[^"]*"`

### Escape sequences
Escape sequences are used to define certain special characters within string literals.

The following escape sequences are available:

* `\'`: single quote
* `\"`: double quote
* `\?`: question mark
* `\\`: backslash
* `\a`: audible bell
* `\b`: backspace
* `\f`: form feed - new page
* `\n`: line feed - new line
* `\r`: carriage return
* `\t`: horizontal tab
* `\v`: vertical tab
* `\nnn`: arbitrary octal value, maximum of 3 characters.
* `\xnn`: arbitrary hexadecimal value, always 2 characters.
* `\<new line>`: wraps on next line.

- Octal escape sequences have a limit of three octal digits,
but terminate at the first character that is not a valid octal digit if encountered sooner.
- Hexadecimal escape sequences parses always the next two characters.

### Multi line Strings
A string literal is multi line if it starts with a backslash followed by a newline.

**Example:**
```
string html = "\
<html>
  <head/>
  <body>
    <p>
      Hello<br/>
      Multiline<br/>
      World<br/>
    </p>
  </body>
</html>
";
```

# Type system
Every type is also a static variable referencing its metadata
(the internal representation of the symbol used by the compiler exposed to the run-time).

## Builtin types
The most fundamental types the virtual machine can work with, are exposed to the compiler.

### void
The type void is an empty type with no values.
No variables of this type can be instantiated. 
Mostly used when function does not return a value.

### bool
May take on the values true and false only.
true and false are defined constants of the language.

### char
1 byte, ASCII character.

### int8
1 byte, signed (two's complement).
Covers values from -128 to 127.

### int16
2 bytes, signed (two's complement),
Covers values from -32,768 to 32,767.

### int32
4 bytes, signed (two's complement).
Covers values from -2,147,483,648 to 2,147,483,647.

### int64
8 bytes signed (two's complement).
Covers values from -9,223,372,036,854,775,808 to +9,223,372,036,854,775,807.

### uint8
1 byte, unsigned (two's complement).
Covers values from 0 to 255.

### uint16
2 bytes, unsigned (two's complement).
Covers values from 0 to 65,535.

### uint32
4 bytes, unsigned (two's complement).
Covers values from 0 to 4,294,967,295.

### uint64
8 bytes, unsigned (two's complement).
Covers values from 0 to 18,446,744,073,709,551,615.

### float32
4 bytes, IEEE 754.
Covers a range from 1.40129846432481707e-45 to 3.40282346638528860e+38
(positive or negative).

### float64
8 bytes IEEE 754.
Covers a range from 4.94065645841246544e-324 to 1.79769313486231570e+308
(positive or negative).

### pointer
`pointer` is a data type whose value refers directly to (or "points to") another value.

### variant
`variant` is a dynamic type, which carries the type of the value,
and a pointer to the value.

it may be defined as:
```
struct variant {
	const typename type;
	const pointer value;
}
```

### typename
`typename` is the compilers internal symbol representation structure.
It contains static utility functions for reflection.

- if it is used as a function, typename will return the type of the identifier:
	- if the argument is a type, it will return `typename`
	- if the argument is a variable, it will return its type
	- if the argument is a variant variable, it will extract the type
	- if the argument is not defined, it will return null

**Example:**
```
// int128 must be defined, and must be a type.
bool hasInt128 = typename(int128) == typename;
```

**Example:**
```
// if integer is not defined, define it as int32
static if (typename(integer) == null) {
inline integer = int32;
}

```

 

### function
`function` is the base type of all functions.

### object
`object` is the base type for all garbage collected types.
Every type inherited from object will be reference counted,
and destroyed when there are no more references to it.
- circular references may retain objects from destruction.


## Aliases
Aliases are symbols referencing types or expressions.
When using an alias the referenced expression is expanded inline.

### Type aliasing

- `int`: alias for `int32` or `int64` depending on the word size of the vm
- `byte`: alias for `uint8`
- `float`: alias for `float32`
- `double`: alias for `float64`

### Expression aliasing

- `null`: pointer value, representing missing data.
- `true`: boolean value, may be defined as: `inline true = 0 == 0;`.
- `false`: boolean value, may be defined as: `inline false = 0 != 0;`.

## Array types
Array type is a collection of zero or more elements of the same type.

### Pointers (Unknown-size arrays)
Pointers are arrays without length.

**Example:**
```
int a[*];
```

- Are assigned and passed to functions by reference.
- Type of elements is known by the compiler.
- The length is unknown.

### Arrays (Fixed-size arrays)
[TODO]

**Example:**
```
int a[2] = {42, 97};
```

- Are assigned and passed to functions by reference.
- Type of elements and length is known by the compiler.

### Slices (Dynamic-size arrays)
Slices are a pair of a pointer to the first element and an integer containing the length of the slice.

**Example:**
```
int a[] = {42, 97, 13};
```

- Are assigned and passed to functions by reference followed by the length.
- Type of elements is known by the compiler.
- The length is known at runtime.

### Maps (Associative arrays)
[TODO]

**Example:**

```
double constants[string] = {
	"pi": Math.pi;
	e: Math.e;
};

assert(constants["pi"] == Math.pi);
assert(constants["e"] == Math.e);
```

Collection types(Array, Stack, Queue, Map, Set, Bag, …) are not part of the language,
they are implemented in the run-time library.


## Record types
Record types are user defined compound types.

**Example:**
```
struct complex {
	// real part
	const double re;
	// immaginary part
	const double im = 0;
}
```


## Assignability
An expression is required to be assignable to a variable or a typename in certain circumstances,
such as initialization, assignment and argument passing in function calls.
A value can be assigned to a variable if some conditions are met.
[TODO]

```
complex val = complex(1, 3);

pointer ptr = pointer(&val);

variant var = variant(&val);

// static cast: no typecheck if assignable or not
complex &c2 = ptr;

// dynamic cast: runtime typecheck if assignable or not
complex &c4 = var;
```

## Integer Promotions
[TODO]


# Statements
Statements are the basic blocks of a program.

## Block Statement

**[Syntax](../Grammar/Cmpl.g4):**
```
qualifiers? '{' statementList '}'
```

- parallel block statements can be used to execute a block of statements parallel.

## Selection statements
Currently only the if statement is available.
[TODO: switch]

### if statement
Main purpose of the if statement is to handle exceptional cases in the control flow.

**[Syntax](../Grammar/Cmpl.g4):**
```
qualifiers? 'if' '(' for_init ')' statement ('else' statement)?
```

The static if construct can be used as a compile time check.
- if the condition evaluates to true then the declarations contained by the block will be visible,
and the statements will be generated.
- if the condition evaluates to false the block gets compiled in a new scope,
but code will be not generated.

## Iteration statements
Currently only the for statement is available.
[TODO: while, do while, ...]

### for statement
The for statement has two forms:
- a generic for like in c and c like languages
- a foreach like form for iteration

**[Syntax](../Grammar/Cmpl.g4):**
```
qualifiers? 'for' '(' for_init? ';' expression? ';' expression? ')' statement
qualifiers? 'for' '(' variable ':' expression ')' statement
```

The static construct of the statement expands inline the statement of the loop.

**Example:**
```
static for (int i = 0; i < 5; i += 1) {
	print(i);
}
```

generates exactly the same code like:

```
print(0);
print(1);
print(2);
print(3);
print(4);
```

The parallel version of the for statement executes the statements of the loop on a worker,
than waits each of them to finish (in case we have fever workers than jobs or a single worker,
the job will be executed on the main worker).

**Example:**
```
parallel for (int i = 0; i < 5; i += 1) {
	...
	print(i);
}
print(99);
```

**Example:**
```
for (int i = 0; i < 5; i += 1) parallel {
	...
	print(i);
}
print(99);
```

These two examples may result different output. In the first example the last statement:
`print(99);` will be executed last, while in the second example it is possible that
 this is not the last executed statement.

To use the foreach like form of the for statement, two functions are required to be defined:

- `iterator`: this function prepares the iterator from a type.
	- the argument for this function is the object you want to iterate.
	- it should return an iterable type(this will be the first argument of the next function).
- `next`: this function advances to the next iterable element.
	- the first argument is the object returned by the iterator function. this has to be passed by reference.
	- the second argument is optional, in case we want to iterate with a value, and not the iterator object.
This argument must be passed by reference or as inout.
	- it must return true if there was a next element, false otherwise.

**Example:**
```
struct Range {int min; int max;}
struct RangeIterator {int pos; int end;}

// make the iterator for the Range type (make Range iterable)
inline iterator(Range &r) = RangeIterator(r.min, r.max);

// make RangeIterator iterable using an int
bool next(RangeIterator &it, int &&value) {
	if (it.pos < it.end) {
		value = it.pos;
		it.pos += 1;
		return true;
	}
	return false;
}

// now we can iterate
for (int i : Range(10, 20)) {
	println(i);
}
```

## Jump statements

### Break statement
The break statement terminates the execution of the innermost enclosing loop.

**[Syntax](../Grammar/Cmpl.g4):**
```
'break' ';'
```

### Continue statement
The continue statement terminates the current and begins the next iteration of the innermost enclosing loop.

**[Syntax](../Grammar/Cmpl.g4):**
```
'continue' ';'
```

### Return statement
The return statement terminates the execution of the current function.

**[Syntax](../Grammar/Cmpl.g4):**
```
'return' initializer? ';'
```

- If an expression is given, before returning the expression is assigned to the result parameter of the function.
- It is allowed to return an expression of type void, even if the function specifies a void return type.
The expression will be evaluated, but nothing will be returned.


## Declaration statement
Declaration statement declares a typename, function, variable or constant.

## Expression statement
Expression statements is an expression terminated with ';'

**[Syntax](../Grammar/Cmpl.g4):**
```
expression ';'
```

- Permitted expressions statements are assignment and invocation expression.


# Expressions
Expressions are responsible for computing values.

## Literals
Literals are compile time constant expressions.
They can be written as:
- binary decimal
- octal decimal
- hexadecimal
- decimal
- suffixed decimal
- floating decimal
- character
- string

**[Syntax](../Grammar/Cmpl.g4):**
```
Literal
```

- A compile time constant expression is an expression whose value can be determined at compile time
(during verification), before any part of the program has been executed.

- Expressions in certain contexts are required to be compile time constant expressions.
	- the length of a fixed-size array: int a[20];
	- the condition of a `static if` statement: static if (true) {...}

## Identifiers
Used to reference typename, variable and function.

**[Syntax](../Grammar/Cmpl.g4):**
```
Identifier
```

## Unary expressions
Unary expressions are composed from an unary operator and one operand.
Only prefix unary operators are supported.
- `!`: logical not. Results true or false.
- `~`: complement. Valid for integer types.
- `-`: unary minus. Change the sign of a number.
- `+`: unary plus. ???

**[Syntax](../Grammar/Cmpl.g4):**
```
('&' | '+' | '-' | '~' | '!') expression
```

## Binary expressions
Binary expressions are composed from a binary operator and two operands.

**[Syntax](../Grammar/Cmpl.g4):**
```
'(' expressionList? ')'
expression '(' expressionList? ')'
'[' expressionList? ']'
expression '[' expressionList? ']'
expression '.' Identifier
```

### Arithmetic expression
Are used to return new values computed from the two operands.
The type of the result for the builtin types is promoted from its operand types.
- `+, -` Additive operators
- `*, /, %` Multiplicative operators

**[Syntax](../Grammar/Cmpl.g4):**
```
expression ('*' | '/' | '%' | '+' | '-') expression
```

### Bitwise expression
May be used on integer types only.
- `&, |, ^` Bitwise operators
- `<<, >>` Bit shift operators

**[Syntax](../Grammar/Cmpl.g4):**
```
expression ('&' | '|' | '^' | '<<' | '>>') expression
```

### Relational expressions
Are used to check if one of the operands is les or greater than the other.
The type of the result is boolean.

**[Syntax](../Grammar/Cmpl.g4):**
```
expression ('<' | '<=' | '>' | '>=') expression
```

### Equality expressions
Are used to check if the left and right operands are equal or not.
The type of the result is boolean.

**[Syntax](../Grammar/Cmpl.g4):**
```
expression ('==' | '!=') expression
```

### Logical expressions
[TODO]
- `||`: logical or operator returns true if **any** of its operands is true.
- `&&`: logical and operator returns true if **all** of its operands is true.


**[Syntax](../Grammar/Cmpl.g4):**
```
expression ('&&' | '||') expression
```

**Example:**
```
bool variable = a || b || c || d;
```

The value of `variable` will be true if any of the variables(a, b, c, d) is evaluated to true.
The evaluation of the values stops when the first expression is evaluated to true.


**Example:**
```
bool variable = a && b && c && d;
```

The value of `variable` will be true if all of the variables(a, b, c, d) is evaluated to true.
The evaluation of the values stops when the first expression is evaluated to false.

### Assignment expressions
Are used to calculate and store new values in the left operand, returning the right operand.
The composed operators are expanded, this means that `a += 3 + b` is converted to `a = a + (3 + b)`.

**[Syntax](../Grammar/Cmpl.g4):**
```
expression ('='| '*=' | '/=' | '%=' | '+=' | '-=' ) expression
expression ('&=' | '|=' | '^=' | '<<=' | '>>=') expression
```

## Ternary expression
The `?:` (conditional) operator is the only ternary operator, this means that it has 3 operand:
- test operand: based on its value the second or the third operand is returned.
- true operand: evaluated and returned only if the first operand evaluates to true.
- false operand: evaluated and returned only if the first operand evaluates to false.

**[Syntax](../Grammar/Cmpl.g4):**
```
expression '?' expression ':' expression
```

**Example:**
```
int variable = (condition ? trueValue : falseValue);
```

Evaluates the first argument(`condition`) and
returns evaluating the second argument(`trueValue`) if the condition is true,
or the third argument(`falseValue`) in case the condition is evaluated to false.

## Operator precedence table

| Operator   | Title          | Example    | Description |
|-----|-----------------------|------------|-------------|
| 15: Primary ||| Associates left to right |
| ( ) | Function call           | sqrt(x)    | function call, type cast, emit |
| [ ] | Array subscript         | values[10] ||
|  .  | Member access           | child.name ||
| 14: Unary ||| Associates right to left |
|  &  | Address of              | &x         ||
|  +  | Unary plus              | +a         ||
|  -  | Unary minus             | -a         ||
|  ~  | Bitwise not             | ~077       ||
|  !  | Logical not             | !ready     ||
| 13: Multiplicative ||| Associates left to right |
|  *  | Multiplication          | i * j||
|  /  | Division                | i / j||
|  %  | Modulus                 | i % j||
| 12: Additive ||| Associates left to right |
|  +  | Addition                | value + i||
|  -  | Subtraction             | x - 10||
| 11: Bit shift ||| Associates left to right |
|  << | Left shift              | byte << 4||
| \>> | Right shift             | i >> 2||
| 10: Relational ||| Associates left to right |
|  <  | Less than               | i < 10||
|  <= | Less than or equal to   | i <= j||
| \>  | Greater than            | i > 0||
| \>= | Greater than or eq to   | count >= 90||
| 9: Equality ||| Associates left to right |
|  == | Equal to               | result == 0 ||
|  != | Not equal to           | c != EOF ||
| === | Same as (is)           | str1 === str2 ||
| !== | Not same as (is not)   | str1 !== str2 ||
| 8: Bitwise AND ||| Associates left to right |
|  &  | Bitwise AND            | word & 077 ||
| 7: Bitwise XOR ||| Associates left to right |
|  ^  | Bitwise XOR            | word1 ^ word2 ||
| 6: Bitwise OR ||| Associates left to right |
| &#124; | Bitwise OR             | word &#124; bits ||
| 5: Logical AND ||| Associates left to right |
|  && | Logical AND            | j > 0 && j < 10 ||
| 4: Logical OR ||| Associates left to right |
|&#124;&#124;| Logical OR             | i > 80 &#124;&#124; ready ||
| 3: Conditional ||| Associates right to left |
|  ?: | Conditional operator   |a > b ? a : b ||
| 2: Assignment ||| Associates right to left |
| = /= %= += -= &= ^= &#124;= <<= >>= | Assignment operators | ||
| 1: Collection ||| Associates left to right |
|  ,  | Comma operator         | i = 10, j = 0||


# Declarations
Every declaration (typename, function or variable) results in a variable declaration and definition.

## Aliasing
Aliasing is an analogue to c preprocessor define, except it is expanded on syntax tree level, and the arguments may be evaluated only once.

**[Syntax](../Grammar/Cmpl.g4):**
```
qualifiers? 'inline' identifier ('(' parameterList? ')')? '=' initializer ';'
```

### Type aliasing

**Example:**
```
inline double = float64;
```

### Expression aliasing

**Example:** constant
```
inline pi = 3.14;
```

**Example:** 
```
inline min(int a, int b) = a < b ? a : b;
```

- the right hand side can also use local variables if static is not used
- static should force the right side not to use local variables
- const should force the right side to be constant

## Enumerations
An enumeration declares a list of named constants all of a given type.

**[Syntax](../Grammar/Cmpl.g4):**
```
qualifiers? 'enum' identifier? (':' typename)? '{' propertyList '}'
```

- It may also add a new type, the enumeration type, if the name is specified.
- The enumeration type is a reference type, and its instances may be assigned
only with null or the values listed inside the enumeration.
- The type of the enumerated values can be specified.
If not specified the type of elements of the enum will be int.
- Every enumeration variable declaration must be initialized.

**Example:**
```
struct vec3f {
	float x;
	float y;
	float z;
}

enum coord: vec3f {
	x: vec3f(1, 0, 0);
	y: vec3f(0, 1, 0);
	z: vec3f(0, 0, 1);
}

coord e1 = coord.x;             // ok: enum variable can be assigned with a value from the enumeration.
coord e2 = e1;                  // ok: enum variable can be assigned with the same type of variable.
e2 = coord.x;                   // ok.
e2 = e1;                        // ok.

vec3f v1 = coord.y;             // ok: values from enum are of type vec3f, so it can be assigned.
vec3f v2 = e1;                  // ok: enum variables can be assigned to variables of their base type.
v2 = coord.x;                   // ok.
v2 = e2;                        // ok.

coord e3 = v1;                  // error: enum variable can be assigned only from a value from the enumeration.
e3 = v1;                        // error.
coord e0;                       // error: enum variable must be initialized.
```

### Iterating enumeration

**Example:**
```
for (coord elem: coord) {
	...
}
```

### Indexing enumeration
if the index is an integer the enumeration on that position is returned.

**Example:**
```
assert(coord[2] === coord.y);
```

if the index is a string lookup by name is performed.

**Example:**
```
assert(coord["y"] === coord.y);
```

### Anonymous enumeration
An anonymous enumeration does not create the enumeration type,
and it exposes the enumerated values to the declaring scope.

**Example:**
```
struct vec3f {
	float x;
	float y;
	float z;

	enum: vec3f {
		zero: vec3f(0, 0, 0);
		unitX: vec3f(1, 0, 0);
		unitY: vec3f(0, 1, 0);
		unitZ: vec3f(0, 0, 1);
	}
}

vec3f v1 = vec3f.y;
```

## [Records](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Record_(computer_science))
Records are user specified compound types.

Records may contain only instance or static members and methods:
- if a member inside the record is declared static, it will become a global variable.
- if a function is declared in the record which is not implemented,
it will be a member function reference, and it must be:
	- reimplemented in the current record (virtual).
	- implemented in the inheritance chain (abstract).
	- initialized when an instance of this record is created.
- if a function is declared and implemented in a record, and does not override a member,
it is declared as a static function.
- if a function is declared static and not implemented it must be reimplemented, as forward functions.

**[Syntax](../Grammar/Cmpl.g4):**
```
qualifiers? 'struct' identifier? (':' (Literal | typename))? '{' declarationList '}'
```

**Example:**
```
struct Complex {
	const double re;
	const double im = 0;
}
```

- `re` and `im` are immutable member variables (can not be changed after initialized).
- `re` is uninitialized, so when an instance is created, it must be specified its value.

**[Example](../Examples/Streams.ci):**
```
struct TextReader: Closeable {
	const ByteReader reader;
	const bool close;

	// abstract method
	int decode(ByteReader reader, char chars[]);

	int read(TextReader this, char chars[]) {
		return this.decode(this.reader, chars);
	}

	int read(TextReader this) {
		char chars[1];
		result = this.read(chars);
		if (result > 0) {
			result = chars[0];
		}
		return result;
	}

	void close(Utf8Reader this) {
		if (this.close) {
			this.reader.close();
		}
	}
}
```

- field `reader` and `close` are immutable, so they must be initialized on instance creation.
- `int decode(ByteReader reader, char chars[])` is unimplemented, it must be implemented in the inheritance chain.
- `int read(TextReader this, char chars[])` is implemented and does not override any method so it will be static.
- `int read(TextReader this)` is implemented and does not override any method so it will be static.
- `void close(Utf8Reader this)` overrides the method from inherited class `Closeable`.

The `read` method can be invoked in 2 forms:
```
// Utf8Reader implements decode method.
TextReader reader = Utf8Reader(Path("file.txt"));

// as static function
int chr = TextReader.read(reader);

// or simply using Uniform Function Call Syntax
int chr = reader.read();
```

### Static records
Records which are declared static will have all members static (is sort of a namespaces).
These types of records will have no size, and can not be instantiated.
The best example of its usage is `static struct Math {...}` 

### Packed records
A record can be packed with a small integer of a power of 2. [0, 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32].
- When a struct is packed with 0, it becomes a c like union,
meaning every member of it will start at the same memory location.
- When a struct is packed with 1, the compiler will not generate any gap between the members,
this may result in very expensive memory access to the members.

### Extended records
Extended records are always allocated in the heap, and are automatically released,
except if they are members of an enumeration.
At the end of every inheritance chain is the type `object`.

**Example:**
```
struct ComplexClass: object {
	const double re;
	const double im = 0;
}

ComplexClass c1 = { re: 8 };	// allocated on heap, initialized
```
- `c1` is allocated on heap.
- `c1` is initialized with: `re: 8` and `im: 0`;


## Operator overloading
Operators can be overloaded using the `inline` keyword.

### Type construction/conversion operator

**[Syntax](../Grammar/Cmpl.g4):**
```
qualifiers? 'inline' identifier ('(' parameterList? ')')? '=' initializer ';'
```

**Example:**
```
inline Complex(float64 re) = Complex { re: re };
Complex a = Complex(9);
```

**Example:**
```
struct Celsius { double degrees; }
struct Fahrenheit { double degrees; }

// type conversions
inline Celsius(float64 value) = { degrees: value };
inline Fahrenheit(float64 value) = { degrees: value };
inline Celsius(Fahrenheit value) = Celsius((value.degrees - 32) * (5. / 9.));
inline Fahrenheit(Celsius value) = Fahrenheit((value.degrees + 32) * (9. / 5.));

Celsius boilC = Celsius(100.);                 // => inline Celsius(float64 value)
Fahrenheit boilF = Fahrenheit(boilC);          // => inline Fahrenheit(Celsius value)
```

### Unary and binary operators

**[Syntax](../Grammar/Cmpl.g4):**
```
'inline' ('&' | '+' | '-' | '~' | '!') ('(' parameterList? ')')? '=' initializer ';'
'inline' ('*' | '/' | '%') ('(' parameterList? ')')? '=' initializer ';'
'inline' ('+' | '-') ('(' parameterList? ')')? '=' initializer ';'
'inline' ('&' | '|' | '^') ('(' parameterList? ')')? '=' initializer ';'
'inline' ('<<' | '>>') ('(' parameterList? ')')? '=' initializer ';'
'inline' ('<' | '<=' | '>' | '>=') ('(' parameterList? ')')? '=' initializer ';'
'inline' ('==' | '!=') ('(' parameterList? ')')? '=' initializer ';'
```

**Example:**
```
inline -(Complex a) = Complex(-a.re, -a.im);
inline +(Complex a, Complex b) = Complex(a.re + b.re, a.im + b.im);

Complex a = Complex(3);                 //  3 + 0 * i
Complex b = -a;                         // -3 + 0 * i
Complex c = a + a;                      //  6 + 0 * i
```

### Property/Extension operators

**[Syntax](../Grammar/Cmpl.g4):**
```
qualifiers? 'inline' identifier ('(' parameterList? ')')? '=' initializer ';'
qualifiers? 'inline' '('')' ('(' parameterList? ')')? '=' initializer ';'
qualifiers? 'inline' '['']' ('(' parameterList? ')')? '=' initializer ';'
```

**Example:**
```
Complex a = Complex(3);                 // 3 + 0 * i
Complex b = Complex(5, 1);              // 5 + 1 * i

inline abs(Complex a) = Math.hypot(a.re, a.im);
double x = a.abs();

inline add(Complex a, Complex b) = Complex(a.re + b.re, a.im + b.im);
Complex sum = a.add(b);

inline [](Complex c, int idx] = idx == 0 ? c.re : idx == 1 ? c.im : Math.Nan;
inline [](Complex c, string idx] = idx == "re" ? c.re : idx == "im" ? c.im : Math.Nan;
inline ()(Complex c, int idx) = c[i];

float64 re = a[0];        // => inline [](Complex c, int idx)
float64 im = a["im"];     // => inline [](Complex c, string idx)
float64 re2 = a(0);       // => inline ()(Complex c, int idx)
```

## Functions
[TODO]

- Functions that are not implemented, will be converted to function references.
- Functions references must be initialized, or implemented (re-declared as implemented function).
- Functions are assigned and passed to functions as delegates:
	- for inline functions the current stack pointer is pushed to give access to local variables.
	- for member functions the objects reference is pushed to give access to the _self_ variable.

**[Syntax](../Grammar/Cmpl.g4):**
```
qualifiers? function '{' statementList '}'
```

**Example:**
```
float64 sum(float64 data...) {
	double sum = 0;
	foreach(data, inline void(float64 value) {
		// sum is a closure variable.
		sum += value;
	})
	return sum;
}
```

### Function references
Function references can be initialized to point to a function.
They can be used also as function parameters.

**Example:**
```
// referencing the sin function
double reference(double value) = Math.sin;

// invoke the function.
double x = sin();

// compare is a function reference.
void sort(int values[], int compare(int a, int b)) {
	...
}
```

### Forward declared functions
Forward declared functions are functions declared then used, and then implemented.
if a function is forward declared, it will be converted to a function reference.

**Example:**
```
// forward declaration of function.
double forward();

// invoke the function.
double x = forward();

// implementaton of forward declared function.
double forward() {
	return Math.pi;
}
```

### Functions with special names

If a function name is a type name, by convention it is considered to be a constructor for that type,
so it should return an instance of the type represented by the function name.

- Another special function name is used for the foreach iterator to advance to the next element.
The iterator function should take the form:
```
bool next(iterator &it[, element &&current]);
```

[TODO] rename `next` to `for`

## Variables

**[Syntax](../Grammar/Cmpl.g4):**
```
qualifiers? (variable | function) ( '=' initializer)? ';'
```

A variable is a named property which value may change at runtime.

### Constant variables
Variables marked with the `const` attribute may be assigned only at initialization.

### Static variables
Variables marked with the `static` attribute will point to the same global memory.
Initialization of all static variables are executed when the main function is executed.

### Variable initialization
[TODO]

### Record initialization
[TODO]

**Example:**
```
// call the initializer function
Complex x = Complex(1, 2);

// TODO: literal initialization
Complex x = {re: 1, im: 2};

// TODO: literal initialization with type
Model x = Sphere {x:0, y:0, z:0, radius: 20};
```

### Array initialization
[TODO]

**Example:**
```
// initialize the first 3 elements with the given values
// the rest will be initalized with 0 (default type initializer)
int a[100] = {1, 2, 3};

// initialize all elements with the value 4
int a[100] = {*: 4};

// initialize all elements with null
// then override some of them
string xmlEscape[255] = {
	*: null,
	'"': "&quot;",
	'\'': "&apos;";
	'<': "&lt;",
	'>': "&gt;",
	'&': "&amp;";
};
```

### Default type initializer
Some of the builtin types have default type initializer (int, float, ...),
and some must be initialized when a new instance is created (pointer, variant, typename, function).
All enumerated types should have no default initializer, so they must be explicitly initialized.

**Example:**
```
int a;       // ok, a is initialized with default type initializer.
typename b;  // error: variable `b` must be initialized.
```

### Default field initializer
All constant fields of a record must be initialized when creating an instance.

**Example:**
```
Complex x;                     // error: variable `x` must be initialized.
Complex x = {};                // error: all fields of `x` must be initialized.
Complex x = {re: 2};           // ok, `im` initialized with default field initializer.
Complex x = {re: 2; im: -1;};  // ok, all fields are initialized.
```
