# Type system
<!--outline:
	Builtin types
	Aliases
	Record types
	Array types
		Pointers (Unknown-size arrays)
		Arrays (Fixed-size arrays)
		Slices (Dynamic-size arrays)
		Maps (Associative arrays) [TODO]
	Assignability
	Integer Promotions
-->

Every type is a static variable referencing its metadata (the internal representation of the symbol used by the compiler exposed to the runtime).

## Builtin types

The most fundamental types the compiler and the virtual machine can work with, are exposed to the compiler.

### void
The type void is an empty type with no values.
No variables of this type can be instantiated.

### bool
May take on the values true and false only.
true and false are defined constants of the language.

### char
1 byte, ascii character.

### int8
1 byte, signed (two's complement). Covers values from -128 to 127.

### int16
2 bytes, signed (two's complement), -32,768 to 32,767.

### int32
4 bytes, signed (two's complement). -2,147,483,648 to 2,147,483,647.

### int64
8 bytes signed (two's complement). Ranges from -9,223,372,036,854,775,808 to +9,223,372,036,854,775,807.

### uint8
1 byte, unsigned (two's complement). Covers values from 0 to 255.

### uint16
2 bytes, unsigned (two's complement). Covers values from 0 to 65,535.

### uint32
4 bytes, unsigned (two's complement). Covers values from 0 to 4,294,967,295.

### uint64
8 bytes, unsigned (two's complement). Covers values from 0 to 18,446,744,073,709,551,615.

### float32
4 bytes, IEEE 754. Covers a range from 1.40129846432481707e-45 to 3.40282346638528860e+38 (positive or negative).

### float64
8 bytes IEEE 754. Covers a range from 4.94065645841246544e-324 to 1.79769313486231570e+308 (positive or negative).

### pointer
is a data type whose value refers directly to (or "points to") another value.

### variant
is a dynamic type, which carries the type, and a pointer to the value.

`struct variant {const typename type; const pointer value;}` 

### typename
is the compilers internal type representation structure.
contains static functions for reflection, and some utility functions like sizeof.

### function
base type of all functions.

### object
base type for all reference type classes.
every type inherited from object will be reference counted, and destroyed when there are no more references to it.

TODO: circular references may retain objects from destruction.


## Aliases
Aliases are symbols referencing types or expressions. When using an alias the referenced expression is inlined.


* *int*: alias for int32 or int64 depending on the word size of the vm

* *long*: alias for int64

* *byte*: alias for uint8

* *float*: alias for float32

* *double*: alias for float64

* *var*: alias for variant

* ***true***: `inline true = 0 == 0;`

* ***false***: `inline false = 0 != 0;`


## Record types
Record types are user defined compound types.

**Example:**

```
struct complex {

	// real part
	const double re;

	// immaginary part
	const double im;
}
```

## Array types
Array type is a collection of zero or more elements of the same type.

### Pointers (Unknown-size arrays)

**Example:**

```
int a[*];
```

- Pointers (typed) are the same as arrays without length.
- Are assigned and passed to functions by reference.
- Type of elements are known by the compiler.
- The length is unknown.

### Arrays (Fixed-size arrays)

**Example:**

```
int a[2];
```

- Are passed to functions by reference.
- Type of elements and length is known by the compiler.

### Slices (Dynamic-size arrays)

**Example:**

```
int a[];
```

- Slices are a pair of a pointer to the first element and an integer containing the length
of the slice, where type of data is known by the compiler, the length by runtime.
- Are assigned and passed to functions by reference followed by the length.
- Type of elements are known by the compiler.

### Maps (Associative arrays) [TODO]

**Example:**

```
double constants[string] = {
    "pi": Math.pi,
    e: Math.e,
};

assert(constants["pi"] == Math.pi);
assert(constants["e"] == Math.e);

```

- Map is a collection of a (key, value) pair, where keys are unique.
- Set can be implemented using a map.

## Assignability
An expression is required to be assignable to a variable or a typename in certain circumstances,
such as initialization, assignment and argument passing in function calls.
A value can be assigned to a variable if some conditions are met.

[TODO]

```
complex val = complex(1, 3);

pointer ptr = pointer(&val);

variant var = variant(&val);

// static cast: emit(Complex&, ref(ptr));
// TODO: this should be explicit.
complex c1 = ptr;
complex &c2 = ptr;

// dynamic cast: emit(Complex&, variant.unbox(var, Complex));
complex c3 = var;
complex &c4 = var;
```

## Integer Promotions

[TODO]
