# Statements
<!--outline:
	Block Statement
	Selection statements
		if statement
		switch statement
	Iteration statements
		for statement
		while statement
		do while statement
	Jump statements
		break statement
		continue statement
		return statement
	Declaration statement
	Expression statement
-->

Statements are the basic blocks of a program.

## Block Statement

**Syntax:**

```
'parallel'? '{' statement* '}'
```

parallel block statements can be used to execute a block of statements parallel.

## Selection statements

Currently only the if statement is available, [TODO: switch]

### if statement

Main purpose of the if statement is to handle exceptional cases in the control flow.

**Syntax:**

```
'static'? 'if' '(' expression ')' statement ('else' statement)?
```

The static if construct is a compile time check.
- if the condition evaluates to true then the declarations contained by the block will be visible and the statements will be generated.
- if the condition evaluates to false the block gets compiled in a new scope, but code will be not generated.

## Iteration statements

Currently only the for statement is available, [TODO: while, do while, ...]

### for statement

The for statement has two forms:
- a generic for like in c and c like languages
- a foreach like form for iteration

**Syntax:**

```
('static' | 'parallel')? 'for' '(' expression? ';' expression? ';' expression? ')' statement
'for' '(' declaration ':' expression ')' statement
```

The static construct of the statement should inline the statement of the loop.

**Example:**

```
static for (int i = 0; i < 5; i += 1) {
	print(i);
}
```

should produce exactly the same code like:

```
print(0);
print(1);
print(2);
print(3);
print(4);
```

The parallel version of the for statement executes the statements of the loop with a worker,
than waits each of them to finish (in case we have fever workers than jobs or a single worker,
the job will be executed on the main worker).

**Example.wait:**

```
parallel for (int i = 0; i < 5; i += 1) {
	...
	print(i);
}
print(99);
```

**Example.nowait:**

```
for (int i = 0; i < 5; i += 1) parallel {
	...
	print(i);
}
print(99);
```

These two examples may result different output. In the first example the last statement:
`print(99);` will be executed last, while in the second example it is possible that
 this is not the last executed statement.

To use the foreach like form of the for statement, two functions are required to be defined:

- `iterator`: this function prepares the iterator from a type.
  - the argument for this function is the object you want to iterate.
  - it should return an iterable type(this will be the first argument of the next function).

- `next`: this function advances to the next iterable element.
  - the first argument is the object returned by the iterator function. this has to be passed by reference.
  - the second argument is optional, in case we want to iterate with a value, and not the iterator object.
   This argument must be passed by reference or as inout.
  - it must return true if there was a next element, false otherwise.

**Example:**

```
struct Range {int min; int max;}
struct RangeIterator {int pos; int end;}

// make the iterator for the Range type (make Range iterable)
inline iterator(Range &r) = RangeIterator(r.min, r.max);

// make RangeIterator iterable using an int
bool next(RangeIterator &it, int &&value) {
	if (it.pos < it.end) {
		value = it.pos;
		it.pos += 1;
		return true;
	}
	return false;
}

// now we can iterate
for (int i : Range(10, 20)) {
	println(i);
}
```

## Jump statements

### break statement

**Syntax:**

```
'break' ';'
```

The break statement terminates the execution of the innermost enclosing loop.

### continue statement

**Syntax:**

```
'continue' ';'
```

The continue statement terminates the current and begins the next iteration of the innermost enclosing loop.

### return statement

**Syntax:**

```
'return' expression? ';'
```

The return statement terminates the execution of the current function.
If an expression is given, before returning the expression is assigned to the result parameter of the function.

It is allowed to return an expression of type void, even if the function specifies a void return type.
The expression will be evaluated, but nothing will be returned.

## Declaration statement
Declaration statement declares a typename, function, variable or constant.

## Expression statement
Permitted expressions statements are assignment and invocation expression.

